MOTIVE.
INVESTIGATORS BELIEVE THE CO-
PILOT DELIBERATELY CRASHED THE
GERMANWINGS PASSENGER PLANE INTO
THE ALPS, BUT ARE SEARCHING FOR
WHY.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY:
AN INTERVENTION IN YEMEN.
SAUDI ARABIA LAUNCHES AIR
STRIKES AGAINST REBELS WHO'VE
SHAKEN THE BALANCE OF POWER.
>> Wdrufoof: PLUS...
>> IF YOU HAVE CASH, YOU ARE
KING RIGHT NOW.
>> Woodruff: INVESTORS SWOOP
INTO FLORIDA, EAGER TO BUY UP
FORECLOSED HOMES AND MAK BIGE
RETURNS.
BUT IS HISTORY FATED TO REPEAT
ITSELF ONLY YEARS AFTER THE
GREAT RECESSION?
>> WE HAVE LARGE HEDGE FUNDS IN
OUR AREA, BUYING UP MASS AMOUNTS
OF HOUSES, RENTING THEM OUT, AND
THEN THEY TAKE 'EM IN BIG POOLS
AND THEY SELL 'EM UP TO THE NEW
YORK STOCK EXCNGE.HA
>> Ifill: AND...
>> BASKETBALL, SPORTS IS THE
HOOK, BUT ONCE YOU GET THEM
HOOKED: FAMILY.
LOVE.
FRIENDSHIP.
>> Ifill: USING BASKETBALL TO
GEDST  TO READ.
A NOVEL IN VERSE THAT WON THIS
YEAR'S HIGHEST HONOR IN YOUNG
ADULT LITERATURE.
>> HE WAS ACTIVE.
THERE WAS ACTION.
THAT'S WHAT I LIKE.
I LIKE TO INSPI ANDRE SHOW
CHILDREN THAT POETRY IS.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR
>> Ifill: THE RECOVERY OF BODIES
AND WRECKAGE FROM DOWNED
GERMANWINGS FLIGHT 9525
CONTINUED TODAY, AS
INVESTIGATORS ANNOUNCED A
STARTLING FINDING: THAT THE
PILOT IN CONTROL OF THE PLANE
WHEN IT CRASHED INTO MOUNTAINOUS
TERRAIN, DID SO INTENTIONALLY.
150 PEOPLE LOST THEIR LIVES.
JONATHAN RUGMAN OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS FILED THIS
REPORT FROM NEAR THE CRASH SITE.
>> Reporter: TREADING THEIR
WAY THROUGH ALPINE PASS, THESE
ARE THE RELATIVES OF THOSE WHO
DIED IN THESE ALPINE PASSES TWO
DAYS AGO.
THEY WANT TO BE CLOSE TO THEIR
LOVED ONES' LAST LIVING MOMENT,
HOWEVER ALL THOSE MOMENTS ARE.
THE COUNTRYSIDE HERE IS REMOTE
AND SPLENDID, THOUGH NOW SCARRED
BY DISASTER.
NO ONE HERE IS CALLING THIS AN
ACCIDENT ANYMORE.
THIS WAS ALWAYS GOING TO BE
REALLY DIFFICULT JOURNEY FOR
THESE FAMILIES TO MAKE, MADE
EVEN MORE DIFFICULT BY THE
REVELATION THAT THE COPILOT
APPEARS TO HAVE CRASHED THE
PLANE DELIBERATELY, KILLING
HIMSELF AND 149 OTHER PEOPLE.
IT WAS THIS MANGLED COCKPIT
VOICE RECORDER WHICH GAVE UP HIS
SECRET.
IT SEEMS THE COPILOT LOCKED THE
CAPTAIN OUT OF THE CABIN AND
THEN STEERED THE PLANE INTO ITS
FINAL DESCENT.
THE PROSECUTOR HANDLING THIS
INVESTIGATION TALKING OF
DELIBERATE INTENT TO DESTROY THE
AIRCRAFT.
>> ( TRANSLATED ): THE MOST
PLAUSIBLE AND POSSIBLE
INTERPRETATION FOR SUSS THE
COPILOT REFUSED TO OPEN THE DOOR
OF THE COCKPIT TO THE FLIGHT
CAPTAIN AND ACTIVATED THE BUTTON
TO START THE DESCENT.
>> Reporter: THE PROSECUTOR
DESCRIBED THE FLIGHT'S FINAL TEN
MINUTES.
HE SAID THE CAPTAIN LEFT THE
COCKPIT, PERHAPS TO USE THE
BATHROOM, LEAVING THE COPILOT
ALONE AT THE CONTROLS TO START
THE PLANE'S DESCENT.
THE CAPTAIN IS HEARD PLEADING TO
BE LET BACK IN, BUT THERE IS NO
RESPONSE.
THE ONLY COCKPIT NOISE, THE
SOUND OF THE COPILOT BREATHING
NORMALLY WITH PASSENGERS HEARD
SCREAMING JUST BEFORE THE MOMENT
OF IMPACT.
THE COPILOT WAS ANDREAS LUBITZ,
A 28-YEAR-OLD GERMAN, RELATIVELY
JUNIOR WITH OVER 600 HOURS OF
FLYING EXPERIENCE, NOT ON THE
POLICE RADAR AND, WE ARE TOLD,
WITH NO KNOWN LINK TO TERRORISM.
COCKPIT DOORS HAVE BEEN
STRENGTHENED SINCE THE SEPTEMBER
11th ATTACKS, BUT THIS AIRBUS
VIDEO SWS HHOOW FLIGHT CREW
SHOULD BE ABLE TO OPEN THE DOOR
FROM THE OUTSIDE ON A KEY PAD,
THOUGH CRUCIALLY, THAT CODE CAN
BE OVERRIDDEN WITH A LOCK SWITCH
INSIDE THE COCKPIT FOR UP TO
FIVE MINUTES, AND THAT'S WHAT
EXPERTS BELIEVE HAPPENED ON
TUESDAY MORNING.
THIS WAS AS CLOSE TO THE CRASH
SITE AS RELATIVES REACHED TODAY.
THE NATIONAL FLAGS OF THOSE
KILLED UNFURLED IN HONOR OF THE
MISSING DEAD.
>> Ifill: TODAY'S REVELATIONS
HAVE SPURRED SERIOUS CONCERNS
OVER SAFETY AND FLIGHT
PROTOCOLS, RANGING FROM COCKPIT
ACCESS AND SECURITY, TO PILOT
TRAINING.
NEWSHOUR AVIATION SPECIALIST,
MILES O'BRIEN, JOINED ME A SHORT
TIME AGO, VIA SKYPE.
MILES, THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IT SEEMS THE QUESTION EVERYONE
IS ASKING TONIGHT IS: HOW COULD
THIS HAPPEN?
>> YEAH.
IT'S PROBABLY MORE IN THE REALM
OF PSYCHIATRY AND PSYCHOLOGY
THAN AVIATION IN SOME RESPECTS,
BUT YOU HAVE TO LOOK AT THE BIG
PICTURE HERE, GWEN, AND THE
SYSTEM THAT IS FACING TREMENDOUS
DEMAND AND A LOT OF COST
PRESSURE.
A LOT OF PILOTS ARE REQUIRED TO
FILL THESE SEATS AND FLY THESE
AIRCRAFT.
THERE'S A PILOT SHORTAGE MOST
EVERYWHERE YOU LOOK IN THE WORLD
RIGHT NOW.
MEANWHILE, THE PAY FOR PILOTS IS
LOW.
SO THERE'S A LOT OF PRESSURE ON
THE AIRLINES TO GET PEOPLE IN
THESE SEATS QUICKLY, AND YOU
HAVE TO ASK THE QUESTION: IF THE
WHOLE VETTING PROCESS, WHICH
WE'VE RELIED ON FOR GENERATIONS
IN AVIATION, IF THAT HAS SOMEHOW
BEEN SHORT CIRCUITED AND WE JUST
DON'T KNOW THE PEOPLE FLYING
AIRPLANES AS WELL AS WE USED TO.
>> Ifill: DESCRIBE THE RULES
FOR COCKPIT ACCESS NORMALLY.
>> WELL, SINCE 9/11 EVERYTHING
CHANGED, OF COURSE.
WE REINFORCED THE COCKPIT DOOR.
IT'S NOT ANYTHING YOU CAN EASILY
BARGE THROUGH.
THAT'S THE DESIGN.
THE WAY IT WORKS IS WHEN YOU GO
OUT, THE PERSON BEHIND THE
LOCKED COCKPIT DOOR REALLY HAS
ALL THE AUTHORITY.
YOU HAVE TO ACKNOWLEDGE SOMEBODY
TRYING TO COME IN AND UNLOCK THE
DOOR.
THERE IS A COMPONENT OF THIS,
THOUGH, THAT DOES AFFORD ACCESS
TO THE COCKPIT IF THERE WAS AN
INCAPACITATED CREW.
BOTH CREW MEMBERS OR ONE CREW
MEMBER WILL PASS OUT AND UNABLE
TO RESPOND, THROUGH A SERIES OF
STEPS, YOU COULD GAIN ACCESS TO
THE COCKPIT, BUT AS LONG AS THE
PERSON ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE
DOOR IN THE FLIGHT DECK DOESN'T
WANT SOMEBODY IN, YOU CAN KEEP
THEM OUT.
>> YOU STARTED WE TALKINGABO UT
THIS BEING AN ALMOST
PSYCHOLOGICAL EXERCISE.
WHAT DOES THE AGE AND EXPERIENCE
LEVEL OF THIS PILOT HAVE TO DO
WITH THIS INVESTIGATION?
WE KNOW HE'S 28 YEARS OLD.
WE KNOW HE HAD A
LOWER-THAN-NORMAL FLYING RECORD.
BUT DOES THAT MEAN ANYTHING AS
WE BEGIN TO GET TO THE BOTTOM OF
THIS?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, THERE'S NO
BLACK BOX FOR THE HUMAN BEING,
AND I'M NOT EQUIPPED TO
PSYCHOLOGICALLY ANALYZE WHAT
MIGHT OR MIGHT NOT HAVE BEEN
GOING ON INSIDE THIS PERSON'S
MIND, BUT I DO KNOW THIS: THE
INDUSTRY HAS REMAINED SAFE OVER
THE YEARS THROUGH A LONG, SLOW
APPRENTICESHIP, AND THAT HAS
BEEN SPED UP IN RECENT YEARS AND
CONCURRENT WITH THAT THERE'S
BEEN TREMENDOUS PRESSURE ON THE
AIRLINES TO MAKE A BUCK.
IT'S A VERY DIFFICULT BUSINESS.
THERE'S A LOT OF PRESSURE TO
KEEP THE SALARIES OF PILOTS LOW.
SO YOU HAVE TO WONDER, YOU KNOW,
IS THE PROCESS NOT SELECTING THE
BEST PEOPLE FOR THE JOB AND ARE
WE, IN FACT, NOT TRAINING THEM
UP TO STANDARDS WE PREFER
BECAUSE IT'S FRANKLY CHEAPER.
>> Ifill: AND IT'S A
SELF-POLICING QUESTION ABOUT
WHETHER A PILOT WHO HAS
RESPONSIBILITIES FOR SO MANY
LIVES IS IN THE MENTAL STATE THE
FLY.
>> EXACTLY.
I MEAN, BASICALLY WHEN YOU GET
HIRED BY AN AIRLINE, THEY DO A
PSYCHOLOGICAL TEST.
THAT'S THE LAST YOU GET OF A
THE FIRST-CLASS MEDICAL DONE BY
MEDICAL EXAMINERS EVERY SIX
MONTHS DOES NOT INCLUDE A
PSYCHOLOGICAL TEST.
THEY MIGHT SAY, HEY, HOW YOU
DOING, THAT KIND OF THING, BUT
NOTHING MUCH MORE BEYOND THAT.
SO THE SYSTEM TOOK CARE OF
ITSELF.
BACK IN THE DAYS WE HAD
THREE-PERSON CREWS.
WE HAD LARGELY MILITARY CREWS.
THERE WAS A SIV, A VETTING
PROCESS WHICH REALLY DISTILLED
WHO ENDED UP IN THE COCKPIT AND
THERE WERE FEWER COCKPIT SEATS
TO FILL AFTER ALL WHICH TOOK
CARE OF THIS SITUATION.
NOW THAT THIS IS A DIFFERENT
ENVIRONMENT, THE AIRLINES AND
THE REGULATORS PERHAPS NEED TO
LOOK AT PSYCHOLOGICAL COMPONENTS
AND VETTING THESE PEOPLE IN A
DIFFERENT WAY.
>> Ifill: NOW THAT WE HAVE
SEEN THIS CRASH SITE, WHICH IS
HORRIFIC AND SO MANY LITTLE
PIECES, HOW DOES THE
INVESTIGATION PROCEED GOING
FORWARD?
>> WELL, WE HAVE THE BIG PIECES.
IF YOU HAD TO PICK ONE BLACK BOX
TO FIND, THE COCKPIT VOICE
RECORDER IN THIS CASE IS THE
ONE, SO I THINK, YOU KNOW, SOME
OF THE KEY INFORMATION THAT WE
NEED IS IN THERE.
IT WOULD BE NICE TO HAVE THE
FLIGHT DATA RECORDER JUST TO
CORROBORATE WHAT WE'VE HEARD
ABOUT CONTROL INPUTS BY THE
REMAINING FLIGHT CREW MEMBER,
BUT THIS GOES BACK TO AN ONGOING
ISSUE IN THE INDUSTRY.
WE HAVE THE CAPABILITY, THE
TECHNOLOGY, THERE'S NO REASON
WHY WHEN A PLANE IS
NON-RESPONSIVE FOR AS LONG AS
TEN MINUTES THAT WE CAN'T
SOMEHOW GET A VIEW INSIDE THAT
COCKPIT, CAMERAS IN THE COCKPIT,
AND STREAMING DATA FROM THE
AIRCRAFT SO WE KNOW WHAT'S GOING
ON.
THERE'S NO REASON NOT TO DO
THIS, EXCEPT FOR MONEY.
ONCE AGAIN, I THINK THIS BRINGS
US BACK TO OUR THEME.
>> Ifill: MILES O'BRIEN
JOINING US BY SKYPE.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME, GWEN.
>> Woodruff: CLOSER TO HOME,
COMMUNITIES ACROSS OKLAHOMA AND
ARKANSAS ARE CLEANING UP TODAY
AFTER BEING HIT BY THIS SEASON'S
FIRST ROUND OF TORNADOES.
TWISTERS RIPPED THROUGH BOTH
STATES YESTERDAY, KILLING AT
LEAST ONE PERSON IN TULSA.
THE STORMS FLATTENED HOMES AND
BUSINESSES, TOPPLED POWER LINES,
AND CAUSED MULTIPLE INJURIES.
OKLAHOMA GOVERNOR MARY FALLIN
TOURED THE DAMAGE IN MOORE, A
TOWN HIT HARD IN 2013 BY A
POWERFUL TWISTER THAT KILLED 24
PEOPLE.
>> WE'VE BEEN DOWN THIS ROAD
BEFORE.
WE KNOW WHAT TO DO AND I'M JUST
VERY GRATEFUL THAT WE HAVE SO
MANY PEOPLE THAT WORKED SO HARD
OVER THE NIGHT TO MAKE SURE THAT
PEOPLE WERE SAFE, TO MAKE SURE
THEY WEREN'T INJURED, AND THEN
TO CERTAINLY MAKE SURE THAT WE
KEEP OUR ROADS AND HIGHWAYS
BLOCKED OFF FROM POWER LINES
THAT WERE DOWN AND MAKE SURE
THAT THE TRAVELING PUBLIC WAS
ALSO SAFE.
>> Woodruff: FALLIN DECLARED A
STATE OF EMERGENCY IN 25
OKLAHOMA COUNTIES.
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF RESIDENTS
ARE STILL WITHOUT POWER.
>> Ifill: THE GOVERNOR OF
INDIANA DECLARED A PUBLIC HEALTH
EMERGENCY TODAY TO HELP CONTAIN
AN H.I.V. EPIDEMIC.
RURAL SCOTT COUNTY NEAR THE
BORDER WITH KENTUCKY HAS
RECORDED 79 NEW H.I.V. CASES
SINCE JANUARY.
ALL WERE TIED TO INTRAVENOUS
DRUG USE OF THE PRESCRIPTION
PAINKILLER OPANA.
REPUBLICAN MIKE PENCE IS AGAINST
NEEDLE-EXCHANGE PROGRAMS, BUT
MADE AN EXCEPTION AND AUTHORIZED
A SHORT-TERM PROGRAM.
>> THIS IS ALL HANDS ON DECK.
THIS IS A VERY SERIOUS
SITUATION.
WE WILL NOT ONLY CONTAIN THE
SPREAD OF THIS VIRUS BUT WE ARE
GOING TO SPEED RELIEF AND
MEDICATION TO PEOPLE THAT HAVE
BEEN AFFECTED BY IT.
AND WE'RE GOING TO ARREST ITS
EXPOSURE AND THROUGH AN
AGGRESSIVE LAW ENFORCEMENT
EFFORT, WE'RE GOING TO FIND THE
PEOPLE THAT ARE RESPONSIBLE.
>> Ifill: THE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION
RECOMMENDED NEEDLE-EXCHANGE TO
HELP KEEP THE NUMBER OF H.I.V.
INFECTIONS AT BAY.
BUT STATE HEALTH OFFICIALS STILL
EXPECT THE NUMBER OF CASES TO
INCREASE, AS MORE PEOPLE ARE
CONTACTED.
>> Woodruff: DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE OFFICIALS HAVE ARRESTED
TWO ILLINOIS COUSINS, BOTH OF
THEM NATIONAL GUARDSMEN, ON
CHARGES THEY WERE JOINING
ISLAMIC STATE FIGHTERS.
ONE MAN WAS ARRESTED AT A
CHICAGO AIRPORT LAST NIGHT, AND
WAS ALLEGEDLY LEAVING FOR EGYPT
TO JOIN THE MILITANT
ORGANIZATION.
THE COUSINS ALLEGEDLY TOLD AN
UNDERCOVER F.B.I. AGENT THEY HAD
PLANS TO ATTACK AN ILLINOIS
MILITARY FACILITY.
>> Ifill: IN IRAQ, THE BATTLE TO
TAKE BACK THE CITY OF TIKRIT
FROM ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS
LOST THE SUPPORT OF SHIITE
MILITIAS TODAY.
BUT IT COMES A DAY AFTER THE
U.S. JOINED AIRSTRIKES ON THE
CITY.
IN WASHINGTON, GENERAL LLOYD
AUSTIN, THE HEAD OF U.S. CENTRAL
COMMAND, TOLD A SENATE COMMITTEE
THE U.S. DEMANDED THE IRANIAN-
BACKED MILITIAS LEAVE BEFORE THE
U.S. GOT INVOLVED.
>> I'D LIKE TO JUST HIGHLIGHT
SIR, THAT THREE TOURS IN IRAQ
COMMANDING TROOPS WHO WERE
BRUTALIZED BY THESE SHIA
MILITIAS-- I WILL NOT-- AND I
HOPE WE NEVER COORDINATE OR
COOPERATE WITH SHIA MILTIAS.
>> Ifill: AUSTIN WENT ON TO SAY
THERE ARE NOW ABOUT 4,000 IRAQI
FORCES, COMMANDOS AND POLICE
FIGHTING FOR THE CITY, WITH
AMERICAN HELP.
>> Woodruff: U.S. AND IRANIAN
OFFICIALS WENT BACK TO THE
NEGOTIATING TABLE IN SWITZERLAND
TODAY, WITH A NUCLEAR AGREEMENT
DEADLINE LOOMING.
U.S. SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY AND HIS IRANIAN
COUNTERPART, MOHAMMED JAVAD
ZARIF HAVE SIGNIFICANT GAPS TO
OVERCOME BEFORE MARCH 31.
NEGOTIATIONS HAVE ALREADY BEEN
EXTENDED TWICE OVER THE PAST TWO
YEARS.
>> Ifill: MORE THAN 1,000
CIVILIANS HAVE BEEN KILLED BY
THE MILITANT GROUP BOKO HARAM
THIS YEAR.
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH SAID THEY
DIED IN ATTACKS FROM NORTHEAST
NIGERIA, TO NEIGHBORING
CAMEROON, CHAD, AND NIGER.
AHEAD OF THIS WEEKEND'S
ELECTIONS, THE NIGERIAN
GOVERNMENT HAS BROUGHT IN
MERCENARIES FROM SOUTH AFRICA
AND THE FORMER SOVIET UNION TO
PUSH THE MILITANTS BACK.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN THE U.S.,
STOCKS ON WALL STREET EXTENDED
THEIR LOSSES FOR A FOURTH DAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 40 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
17,678.
THE NASDAQ FELL 13 POINTS,
AND THE S&P 500 SLIPPED NEARLY
FIVE.
>> Ifill: THE 15th CENTURY
MONARCH, KING RICHARD III,
RECEIVED A PROPER BURIAL TODAY
IN LEICESTER, ENGLAND.
ROYALTY, RELIGIOUS LEADERS AND
THE ARCHAEOLOGISTS WHO
DISCOVERED RICHARD'S REMAINS IN
A PARKING LOT IN 2012, WERE ALL
IN ATTENDANCE.
THE LONG-LOST KING DIED IN
BATTLE IN 1485, AND WAS BURIED
WITHOUT A COFFIN IN A CHURCH
THAT WAS LATER DESTROYED.
SCIENTISTS IDENTIFIED HIS
REMAINS BY HIS DISTINCTIVELY
CURVED SPINE, RADIOCARBON DATING
AND D.N.A. TESTS.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR:
YEMEN'S DESCENT INTO CHAOS, THE
REGION REACTS.
HOW BAD NEWS FOR FLORIDA
HOMEOWNERS HAS BECOME GOOD NEWS
FOR INVESTORS.
BOTH PARTIES AGREE ON A WAY TO
HELP MEDICARE DOCTORS GET PAID.
AND, THE 2015 NEWBERRY AWARD
WINNING NOVEL ON POETRY, RACE
AND BASKETBALL.
>> Woodruff: THE CHAOS IN YEMEN
HAS TAKEN ANOTHER DRAMATIC TURN,
AS NEIGHBORING SAUDI ARABIA
ENTERED THE FIGHT AGAINST REBELS
IN THE COUNTRY WITH AIRSTRIKES.
THE OPERATION BEGAN OVERNIGHT AS
SAUDI JETS FLEW FROM THE SUNNI
KINGDOM'S SOUTHERN DESERT, AND
BOMBARDED MILITARY TARGETS IN
THE YEMENI CAPITAL OF SANAA.
THE GOAL: DRIVE OUT SHIITE
HOUTHI REBELS WHO'VE TAKEN OVER
MUCH OF THE COUNTRY.DI AMBASSAD.
ANNOUNCED THE CAMPAIGN LAST
NIGHT IN WASHINGTON.
>> WE WILL DO WHATEVER IT TAKES
IN ORDER TO PROTECT THE
LEGITIMATE GOVERNMENT OF YEMEN
FROM FALLING AND FROM FACING ANY
DANGERS FROM OUTSIDE MILITIA.
>> Woodruff: THE STRIKES
FLATTENED A NUMBER OF HOMES,
KILLING AT LEAST 18 CIVILIANS.
RESIDENTS WERE LEFT SEARCHING
THROUGH PILES OF RUBBLE FOR
SURVIVORS.
JONATHAN BARTOLOZZI OF MERCY
CORPS IS IN SANAA, AND SPOKE
WITH THE NEWSHOUR VIA SKYPE.
>> PEOPLE WERE WOKEN UP BY
EXPLOSIONS.
WHEN PEOPLE FOUND OUT THAT IT
WAS ACTUALLY A FORMAL MILITARY
INTERVENTION, PEOPLE WERE QUITE
SHOCKED.
WE HAD A SITUATION WHERE THE
MILITARY TARGETS THAT THEY WERE
AIMING FOR WERE QUITE SPECIFIC
>> Woodruff: THOUSANDS OF HOUTHI
SUPPORTERS TOOK TO THE STREETS
OF SANAA, PROTESTING THE SAUDI
AIR STRIKES.
BUT AT A SEPARATE RALLY IN THE
SOUTHERN CITY OF TAIZ, SCORES OF
YEMENIS CHEERED THE ACTION.
THE SAUDIS ARE JOINED IN THE
EFFORT BY OTHER PERSIAN GULF
JORDAN, AND EGYPT.
THOSE NATIONS BACK YEMENI
PRESIDENT ABED RABBO MANSOUR
HADI, WHO'S BEEN IN THE PORT
CITY OF ADEN SINCE FLEEING SANAA
LAST MONTH.
TODAY HADI LEFT THE COUNTRY
UNDER SAUDI PROTECTION AND
ARRIVED IN RIYADH.
>> ( translated ): IT WAS AN
OBLIGATION TO ANSWER THE CALL OF
PRESIDENT HADI.
EGYPT HAS ANNOUNCED ITS
POLITICAL AND MILITARY SUPPORT
TO YEMEN AND ALSO TO JOIN THE
COALITION THROUGH AIR, NAVAL
FORCES AND LAND IF THE MATTER
CALLS FOR IT.
>> Woodruff: THE HEAD OF THE
ARAB LEAGUE ADDED HIS BACKING.
>> ( translated ): IT TOOK PLACE
AFTER THE FAILURE OF ALL TRIALS
TO STOP THE HOUTHI COUP D'ETAT,
AFTER THEIR PERSISTENCE TO TAKE
ESCALATED STEPS AGAINST THE
CONSTITUTIONAL LEGITIMACY AND
THE NATIONAL YEMENI WILL.
>> Woodruff: MEANWHILE, THE
HOUTHIS' KEY SUPPORTER, IRAN,
DENOUNCED THE STRIKES.
YEMEN BECAME THE LATEST
FLASHPOINT IN A LONG-SIMMERING
CONFLICT BETWEEN TEHERAN AND
RIYADH FOR REGIONAL DOMINANCE.
IRAN'S FOREIGN MINISTER:
>> ( translated ): MILITARY
ACTION, ESPECIALLY MILITARY
ACTION FROM OUTSIDE YEMEN
AGAINST TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY
AND AGAINST THE YEMENI PEOPLE
WILL HAVE NO RESULT BUT
BLOODSHED AND SLAUGHTER OF THE
PEOPLE.
>> Woodruff: THE U.S. AUTHORIZED
LOGISTICAL AND INTELLIGENCE HELP
FOR THE CAMPAIGN, BUT AT A
HEARING OF THE SENATE ARMED
SERVICES COMMITTEE, THE TOP
GENERAL OVERSEEING U.S.
OPERATIONS IN THE MIDDLE EAST
HAD FEW ANSWERS.
>> I DON'T CURRENTLY KNOW THE
SPECIFIC GOALS AND OBJECTIVES OF
THE SAUDI CAMPAIGN AND I'D HAVE
TO KNOW THAT TO BE ABLE TO
ASSESS THE LIKELIHOOD OF
SUCCESS.
>> Woodruff: THE CHAIR OF THE
COMMITTEE, ARIZONA REPUBLICAN
JOHN MCCAIN, SAID THE AIRSTRIKES
STEMMED FROM A "TOTAL ABSENCE OF
U.S. LEADERSHIP."
>> Woodruff: JOINING ME NOW TO
SHED SOME LIGHT ON WHAT THE NEW
DEVELOPMENTS MEAN FOR THE
ALREADY SMOLDERING SUNNI/SHIA
SPLIT IN THE REGION ARE:
DAVID ROTHKOPF, EDITOR AND
C.E.O. OF "FOREIGN POLICY"
MAGAZINE.
AND TRITA PARSI, PRESIDENT OF
THE NATIONAL IRANIAN-AMERICAN
COUNCIL AND AUTHOR OF "SINGLE
ROLL OF THE DICE: OBAMA'S
DIPLOMACY WITH IRAN."
WELCOME TO BOTH
OF YOU.
DAVID ROTHKOPF, WHAT PROMPTED
THE SAUDIS AND THEIR ALLIES TO
GET INVOLVED MILITARILY?
AL QAEDA HAS BEEN CAUSING UNREST
IN YEMEN FOR SOME TIME.
WHAT'S DIFFERENT NOW?
>> WELL, I THINK WHAT'S
DIFFERENT NOW IS THE RISE OF THE
HOUTHIS.
THE FACT THEY'RE ALIGNED WITH
IRAN, THE PRINCIPLE RIVALS OF
THE SAUDIS IN THE REGION, AND
THE FACT THAT YEMEN HAS A VERY
LONG BOARDER WITH SAUDI ARABIA,
SO IF, IN FACT, THIS COUNTRY
BECAME A SATELLITE OF THE
IRANIANS, IT WOULD POSE A REAL
STRATEGIC THREAT TO THE SAUDIS.
I ALSO THINK THE OTHER THING
THAT'S DRIVING IT IS THAT THE
SAUDIS AND THE GCC COUNTRIES,
THE EGYPTIANS AND THE OTHERS
THAT ARE SOLVED, DON'T REALLY
FEEL THAT THE UNITED STATES OR
ANY OTHER FOREIGN POWER IS GOING
TO HAVE THE ABILITY TO HELP
STABILIZE THIS.
SO THEY HAD TO TAKE SOME ACTION
ON THEIR OWN.
>> Woodruff: TRITA PARSI,
WOULD A HOUTHI TAKEOVER IN YEMEN
POSE A STRATEGIC THREAT TO SAUDI
ARABIA?
>> WELL, ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK THE PANIC YOU HAVE SEEN
IN SAUDI ARABIA TO SOME EXTENT
UNDERSTANDABLE IN THE RIVALRY
WITH THE IRANIANS.
20 YEARS AGO THE SAUDIS
ESSENTIALLY ENCIRCLED IRAN.
THEY WERE FUNDING THE TALIBAN
AND IRAN WAS ALSO CHECKED BY
SAMANICH.
20 YEARS LATER IT'S PRETTY MUCH
THE OPPOSITE.
IRAN HAS MORE INFLUENCE IN
AFGHANISTAN AND IN IRAQ AND IN
SYRIA THAN THE SAUDIS DO.
AND THE IRANIANS HAVE A FOOTHOLD
IN SAUDI ARABIA'S BACKYARD IN
YEMEN.
IT'S NOT DIFFICULT TO UNDERSTAND
THAT THEY'RE PANICKING, BUT THE
QUESTION IS WHETHER WHAT THEY'RE
DOING RIGHT NOW IS GOING TO BE
ABLE TO ADVANCE THEIR INTERESTS.
>> Woodruff: WHAT DO YOU
THINK?
>> I THINK THE PROBLEM YOU HAVE
IN THE MIDDLE EAST NOW IS YOU
HAVE THIS SIGNIFICANT DIPLOMACY
DEFICIT.
WE'RE NOT GOING TO BE ABLE TO
SEE ANY STABILIZATION IN SYRIA
OR IN YEMEN UNLESS THE SAUDIS
AND THE IRANIANS FIND A WAY TO
BE ABLE TO TALK TO EACH OTHER
RATHER THAN TO FIGHT EACH OTHER
THROUGH PROXIES.
>> Woodruff: I WANT TO ASK YOU
ABOUT THAT, DAVID ROTHKOPF.
YOU DID MENTION THAT THE SAUDIS
WORRIED THAT THE U.S. AND OTHERS
WOULDN'T BE WILLING TO STAND UP
TO IRAN.
THE U.S. IS SUPPORTING THE SAUDI
EFFORT, THOUGH, AREN'T THEY?
>> WELL, IN THEORY THEY'RE
SUPPORTING THEM.
YOUR CLIP A MINUTE AGO NOTED
THAT THE SENIOR U.S. GENERAL
DIDN'T REALLY KNOW WHAT THE
SAUDIS WERE UP.
TO MEANWHILE, YESTERDAY, DESPITE
THE STRAIGHT'S STATEMENTS TO THE
CONTRARY, THE U.S. ACTUALLY WAS
FLYING AIR SUPPORT MISSIONS FOR
THE IRAQIS AND THE IRAQIS, OF
COURSE, IN THEIR FIGHT AGAINST
ISIS ARE VERY CLOSE RELYING TO
THE IRANIANS.
IN SWITZERLAND WE'RE NEGOTIATING
WITH THE IRANIANS ON A NUCLEAR
DEAL THAT MANY, INCLUDING THE
SAUDIS, SEE AS A POTENTIAL
RAPPROCHEMENT WITH THE IRANIANS
SOME WE SEEM TO BE ON BOTH SIDES
OF THIS, AND THAT, OF COURSE, IS
ONE OF THE REASON THE SAUDIS ARE
EXTREMELY UNCOMFORTABLE RIGHT
NOW, AS ARE ESSENTIALLY ALL OF
OUR OTHER TRADITIONAL ALLIES IN
THE REGION.
>> AND THAT'S WHAT MAKES THIS
HARD TO UNDERSTAND, TRITA PARSI.
LET'S LOOK AT IT FROM THE OTHER
PERSPECTIVE, FROM THE IRANIAN
PERSPECTIVE.
HOW COMMITTED ARE THEY TO THE
HOUTHI REBELS?
HOW INVOLVED ARE THEY IN YES,
MA'AMEN?
>> IT'S NOT CLEAR HOW COMMITTED
THEY ARE.
IS THIS SOMETHING THEY'RE DOING
TO PUNISH THE SAUDIS?
BECAUSE THERE IS A FEELING IN
IRAN THE SAUDIS HAVE BEEN GOING
AFTER IRAN FOR SOME TIME.
THE SANCTIONS AGAINST IRANIAN
OIL WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN
SUCCESSFUL WITHOUT THE SAUDIS.
THE SAUDI SUPPORT FOR THE SUNNI
INSURGENCY IN IRAQ THAT STARTED
THE SECTARIAN FIGHT.
ALL THESE THINGS THE IRANIANS
BELIEVE THE SAUDIS HAVE BEEN
DONE AGAINST IRAN WITHOUT
CARRYING MUCH COST.
IF THIS IS SOMETHING TO PUNISH
THE SAUDIS, THE COMMITMENT MAY
NOT BE THAT EXTENSIVE.
IT'S F IT'S PART OF A LARGER
STRATEGIC MOVE BY THE IRANIANS
OR AN EFFORT TO BE ABLE TO
FURTHER COME ACROSS AS A
PROTECTORATE OF ALL SHIITE
POPULATIONS IN THE REGION, THEN
THE COMMITMENT WILL PROBABLY BE
A BIT STRONGER.
>> HOW DO YOU SEE IRANIAN
INTENTION, DAVID ROTHKOPF?
>> WELL, I THINK IT'S CLEARLY
PART OF A STRATEGY, YOU KNOW.
THE PAST COUPLE YEARS OF CHAOS
IN THE MIDDLE EAST HAVE
BENEFITED THE IRANIANS MORE THAN
ANY OTHER COUNTRY, AS TRITA
NOTED IN YEMEN NEW YORK IRAQ, IN
SYRIA, WITH HEZBOLLAH IN
LEBANON, WITH HAMAS IN ISRAEL.
THEY ARE STANDING TO GAIN.
RIGHT NOW IF THEY END UP WITH A
DEAL THAT RELIEVES SANCTION,
ALLOWS THEM TO GET A LITTLE BIT
MORE CASH IN THEIR POCKETS, THEY
CAN STRENGTHEN THEIR HOLD ON THE
REGION AND END UP CONSIDERABLY
STRONGER AT THE END OF THIS.
AND THE SAUDIS AND THE OTHERS DO
NOT SEE THE SAME KIND OF
OPPORTUNITIES FOR THEM.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ABOUT THAT?
DO YOU SEE THIS, TRITA PARSI, DO
YOU SEE WHAT'S GOING ON RIGHT
NOW IN YEMEN AFFECTING THOSE
IRANIAN NUCLEAR TALKS?
>> I DON'T THINK IT'S GOING TO
HAVE A SIGNIFICANT IMPACT ON
THOSE NEGOTIATIONS.
IF ANYTHING IT MAY MAKE IT MORE
CLEAR THAT THERE IS A NEED FOR A
NUCLEAR DEAL THERE.
THE UNITED STATES AND IRAN
ACTUALLY CAN START TALKING ABOUT
REGIONAL DEVELOPMENTS BECAUSE SO
FAR THAT'S BEEN OFF THE TABLE.
I WOULD ALSO CAUTION AGAINST A
VIEW THAT THE IRANIANS SOME WAY
SOMEHOW ARE TAKING OVER THE
REGION.
YES, THE IRANIANS HAVE BEEN ABLE
TO TAKE ADVANTAGE OF CHAOS THAT
HAS EXISTED, WHICH IS ROOTED
FRANKLY IN THE INVASION OF IRAQ
MUCH BETTER THAN OTHERS HAVE.
BUT THE IDEA THAT THIS IS
TURNING INTO SOME SORT OF
IRANIAN HEGEMONY IS A VIEW HELD
IN SAUDI ARABIA, BUT I DON'T
THINK IT'S AN ACCURATE VIEW.
IT IS DRIVEN BY THE SENSE OF PAN
THANK THE SAUDIS ARE HAVING
BECAUSE SO MUCH HAS GONE AGAINST
SAUDI INTERESTS IN THE LAST 20
YEARS, WHICH HAVE VERY LITTLE TO
DO WITH IRAN AND HAVE MUCH MORE
TO DO WITH GENERAL GEOPOLITICAL
TRENDS.
>> FINALLY, AMERICAN INTERESTS
IN ALL OF THIS, BOTH OF YOU HAVE
REFERRED TO THIS.
HOW MUCH SHOULD THE U.S. BE
WORRIED AT THIS POINT ABOUT WHAT
HAS DEVELOPED IN YEMEN?
>> WELL, I THINK WE SHOULD BE
WORRIED ABOUT WHAT'S DEVELOPED
IN YEMEN AS A SYMPTOM OF WHAT'S
GOING ON IN THE REGION.
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN HISTORY,
EFFECTIVELY EVERY SINGLE COUNTRY
IN THE MIDDLE EAST WITH THE
EXCEPTION PERHAPS OF OMAN IS
INVOLVED IN A WAR.
AND THAT, OF COURSE, CREATES THE
CONDITIONS WHERE WARS CAN
SPREAD, WHERE CONFLICTS CAN GET
ESCALATED, WHERE OUR INTERESTS
CAN REALLY SUFFER.
RIGHT NOW THERE IS NO SIGN THAT
WE OR ANY OF OUR ALLYS HAVE ANY
ABILITY TO INFLUENCE THESE
OUTCOMES IN ANY SIGNIFICANT WAY.
THIS IS A VERY, VERY DANGEROUS
MOMENT FOR THE U.S.
INTEREST IN THE REGION AS IT IS
FOR THE COUNTRIES IN THE REGION
THEMSELVES.
>> VERY QUICKLY, TRITA PARSI?
>> I THINK DAVID IS RIGHT.
I THINK IT'S ALSO IMPORTANT TO
NOTE THAT THE TRUE LEADERSHIP
THAT IS NEEDED HERE IS TO DRIVE
A NEW DIPLOMATIC INITIATIVE AND
BRING ALL OF THE DIFFERENT
PARTIES TO THE TABLE.
IN THE PAST THE UNITED STATES
HAS HAD DIFFICULTY DOING THIS,
BECAUSE THE SAUDIS REFUSE TO
COME TO THE TABLE IF THE
IRANIANS WERE THERE.
I THINK IT'S BECOME INCREASINGLY
CLEAR.
ALL MAJOR POWERS HAVE TO BE AT
THE TABLE IN ORDER TO BE ABLE TO
FIND A NEW EQUILIBRIUM IN THE
REGION THROUGH DIPLOMATIC MEANS
RATHER THAN THINKING IT CAN BE
ACHIEVED THROUGH MILITARY MEANS.
>> PARSI MORE AND DAVID
ROTHKOPF, WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: HOME PRICES CONTINUED
THEIR CLIMB BACK DURING THE PAST
YEAR, EVEN IN SOME OF THE CITIES
THAT TOOK THE HARDEST HITS
DURING THE HOUSING CRASH.
BUT AS ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT
PAUL SOLMAN FOUND, THERE'S A
MUCH MORE COMPLICATED PICTURE
BEHIND THE NUMBERS.
HERE'S HIS STORY, PART OF OUR
ONGOING REPORTING, "MAKING
SENSE," WHICH AIRS EVERY
THURSDAY ON THE NEWSHOUR.
>> Reporter: IN FORT MYERS,
FLORIDA, REALTOR MARC JOSEPH'S
WELCOME BUS TOUR, AN OVERVIEW OF
THE LOCAL HOUSING MARKET EVERY
WEDNESDAY MORNING.
AND, SHADES OF THE LAST REAL
ESTATE BOOM HERE, THINGS ARE
HEATING UP.
>> THE TIME TO BUY IS NOW
BECAUSE INVENTORY IS TIGHTENING
UP.
>> Reporter: OF COURSE, IN REAL-
ESTATE SPEAK, NOW IS ALWAYS THE
TIME TO BUY.
>> IF YOU'RE QUESTIONING IF IT'S
THE RIGHT TIME TO BUY, IT IS
DEFINITELY THE RIGHT TIME TO
BUY.
>> Reporter: THAT WAS MARC
JOSEPH FIVE YEARS AGO, WHEN WE
FIRST MET HIM, ON WHAT HE THEN
CALLED "FORECLOSURE TOURS R US,"
TAKING RUBBERNECKING RETIREES
FOR A RIDE AROUND THE WRECKAGE
OF SOUTHWEST FLORIDA'S
SPECTACULAR REAL ESTATE CRASH.
>> DECEMBER OF 2005, UP HERE, WE
HIT $322,000 AS THE AVERAGE
MEDIAN SALES PRICE.
SINCE DECEMBER '05, IT CAME
STRAIGHT DOWN.
FOR THE ENTIRE LAST YEAR, WE
HAVE BEEN HOVERING AT A LEVELING
OFF OF BETWEEN $85,000 AND
$90,000 OVER THE ENTIRE LAST
YEAR.
>> Reporter: THAT WAS SPRING
2010, 24,000 FORECLOSURE CASES
THEN BACKLOGGED IN THE COUNTY
COURT.
TOO BAD WE DIDN'T BUY, BECAUSE
FIVE YEARS LATER, THE MEDIAN
SALES PRICE HAS MORE THAN
DOUBLED, TO NEARLY $200,000.
BUT JOSEPH'S JOB IS TO MOVE THE
PRODUCT, LIKE THIS BANK-OWNED
FORECLOSURE, LAST SOLD FOR
$218,000 IN 2005, STILL 50% OFF
TODAY.
>> THIS IS CONCRETE BLOCK.
I CANNOT REPRODUCE THIS FOR
$109,000.
>> Reporter: OR THIS ONE, LAST
SOLD FOR $246,000 IN 2005.
>> IT'S 32 CENTS ON THE LAST
SALES PRICE BECAUSE I'M ONLY
ASKING $77,000.
SO WHEN SOMEBODY SAYS ARE THERE
DEALS STILL OUT THERE, THIS IS A
DEAL, THEY'RE PAYING $85,000 FOR
VACANT LOTS IN THIS NEIGHBORHOOD
TO PUT UP HOMES.
>> Reporter: SMALL WONDER, SAYS
JOSEPH, THAT INVESTORS LARGE AND
SMALL ARE NOW JUMPING IN, BUYING
HOUSES TO RENT OUT, OR RENOVATE
FOR RE-SALE.
>> PEOPLE ARE TAKING MONEY OUT
OF THEIR RETIREMENT PLANS, AND
THEY'RE MAKING A MOVE.
I'M SEEING IT EVERY DAY.
>> Reporter: JIM GANDHI, DOWN
FROM TORONTO, WAS PRIMED TO
POUNCE.
>> WE'RE USED TO $300 A SQUARE
FOOT AND WE LOOK AT SOMETHING
BELOW $100 A SQUARE FOOT.
I MEAN, IT'S MIND-BOGGLING.
>> Reporter: DEBBIE ABDALE HAILS
FROM BUFFALO, NEW YORK.
>> YOU'RE GOING TO MAKE A LOT
MORE MONEY DOING THIS THAN
LEAVING YOUR MONEY IN STOCKS OR
BONDS OR ANNUITIES.
>> IF YOU HAVE CASH, YOU ARE
KING RIGHT NOW.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, CASH
BIDDING WARS ARE ERUPTING.
>> CASH!
EVERYBODY'S ON THE SAME PAGE
NOW.
PLEASE WATCH YOUR STEP GETTING
OFF.
>> SO GUYS, WHAT YOU HAVE IS A
TWO-BEDROOM, ONE-BATH, $101,000.
>> Reporter: HOW MUCH CAN YOU
RENT THIS OUT FOR?
>> THIS IS 900, 950 TO 1,000,
YOU MIGHT EVEN GET 1,200 BECAUSE
OF THE DESIRABILITY OF WHERE
YOU'RE AT.
>> Reporter: THIS IS GONNA SEEM
LIKE I YOU'MR STRAIGHT MAN OR
SOMETHING, BUT WHY WOULDN'T
ANYBODY DO THAT?
>> THAT'S WHAT I ASK MYSELF
EVERY DAY.
>> BECAUSE IT COMES WITH THE
COUCH.
>> Reporter: YOUNGER GEN X'ERS
AND OLDER MILLENIALS MAY
RECOGNIZE THE ONE CELEBRITYN O
THE BUS, CHRIS TAMBURELLO,
"C.T." OF MTV'S "REAL WORLD" AND
OTHER REALITY SHOWS.
WHAT WAS HE DOING HERE?
>> I'M INTERESTED IN BUYING A
FEW OF THOSE RENTALS ON THE
LOWER END AND FINDING ME A FIXER
UPPER TO LIVE IN, AND JUST
MAKING MY LITTLE CASTLE, YOU
KNOW, MY LITTLE PIECE OF
PARADISE.
>> Reporter: THERE WERE FIXED-UP
FIXER UPPERS ON THE BUS TOUR,
TWO FORMER FORECLOSURES ALREADY
BEING FLIPPED.
THIS ONE'S NOW ON THE MARKET FOR
$279,000.
THIS ONE FOR $399,000, HIGHER
PRICES THAT DEMAND HIGHER RENTS
TO JUSTIFY AS INVESTMENTS.
BUT, SAYS FORECLOSURE EXPERT
DAREN BLOMQUIST, THE RENTERS ARE
PLENTIFUL.
>> THESE ARE DISPLACED
HOMEOWNERS WHO STILL OFTEN NEED
A PLACE TO LIVE, BUT THEY CAN'T
QUALIFY TO BUY, AND SO FOR NOW
THEY ARE RENTERS.
>> PEOPLE LIKE MYSELF THAT ARE
STILL TRYING TO GET THEIR CREDIT
BACK IN SHAPE.
>> Reporter: WE MET LAURA NEGRON
IN 2010, TRANSLATING FOR MARC
JOSEPH IN A CASH-FOR-KEYS
TRANSACTION, A SORT OF VOLUNTARY
EVICTION.
>> IT'S KIND OF INTIMIDATING AND
SCARY THAT SOMEONE JUST WOULD
OFFER YOU $1,500 TO GET OUT OF
YOUR HOUSE.
IT HITS HOME.
>> Reporter: IT HIT HOME BECAUSE
NEGRON HERSELF WAS IN DEFAULT ON
HER MORTGAGE, HADN'T MADE A
PAYMENT IN NEARLY A YEAR.
>> MY HUSBAND WAS OUT OF WORK
FOR EIGHT MONTHS.
>> NO.
IT'S BEEN HARD.
I'M SORRY.
(CRYING)
>> Reporter: TODAY, NEGRON STILL
WORKS FOR MARC JOSEPH,
HAS BEEN PROMOTED TO REAL ESTATE
AGENT.
>> WE HAD TO SHORT SALE OUR
HOUSE.
WE DID A BANKRUPTCY.
>> Reporter: AND ARE YOU GOING
TO BUY IN THE NEXT YEAR OR TWO?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
CAN'T WAIT.
>> Reporter: BOOMERANG BUYERS
LIKE LAURA NEGRON ARE FURTHER
STOKING THE MARKET, SAYS DAREN
BLOMQUIST.
>> WE'RE REALLY SEEING OUR FIRST
WAVE OF BUYERS WHO LOST THEIR
HOMES TO FORECLOSURE NOW
QUALIFYING AND BEING ABLE TO
PURCHASE AGAIN.
BUT THE IRONY IS IN SOME MARKETS
THEY MAY HAVE BEEN PRICED OUT
BECAUSE OF THE BIG INVESTORS
WHO'VE COME INTO THOSE MARKETS
AND PROPPED UP PRICES.
>> Reporter: VERY BIG INVESTORS.
>> WE HAVE LARGE HEDGE FUNDS IN
OUR AREA, BUYING UP MASS AMOUNTS
OF HOUSES, RENTING THEM OUT, AND
THEN THEY TAKE 'EM IN BIG POOLS
AND THEY SELL 'EM UP TO THE NEW
YORK STOCK EXCHANGE, TO THE
R.E.I.T.S, THE REAL ESTATE
INVESTMENT TRUSTS.
>> Reporter: WHAT JOSEPH SENSES
IS, TO PUT IT BLUNTLY, ANOTHER
BUBBLE IN THE MAKING.
>> TO GO FROM $85,000 TO
$200,000 IN FIVE YEARS?
MY FEAR IS THE PEOPLE THAT ARE
IN THOSE HOMES, IF IT TAKES ONE
THEY'RE PAYING RENT, THEY'RE NOT
PAYING MORTGAGES, IF THEY DON'T
MAKE THEIR RENT PAYMENTS...
>> Reporter: SEE YOU LATER.
>> WE HAVE A LOT OF SEE YOU
LATERS.
>> Reporter: AND A LOT OF
INVESTORS LOSING A LOT MONEY.
DAREN BLOMQUIST ISN'T WORRIED...
YET.
>> BUT IF THE MOMENTUM CAN'T BE
STOPPED IN TERMS OF THAT HOME
PRICE APPRECIATION OF 10, 20,
30% A YEAR, THAT'S WHERE WE'RE
GOING TO VERY QUICKLY GET INTO
THAT DANGER ZONE FOR A HOUSING
BUBBLE.
AND UNFORTUNATELY, HUMAN NATURE
IS SUCH THAT A LOT OF TIMES THAT
MOMENTUM CARRIES FARTHER THAN IT
SHOULD.
>> SHOW OF HANDS.
HOW MANY ARE INVESTORS HERE,
PLEASE?
>> Reporter: AND EVEN IF
MOMENTUM ISN'T A PROBLEM, THERE
COULD BE ANOTHER GLUT IF
FLORIDA'S SO-CALLED "SHADOW
INVENTORY" SUDDENLY HITS THE
MARKET.
>> YOU HAVE TO GO OUT AND CHECK
THE PROPERTY TO SEE IF ITS
VACANT OR OCCUPIED.
>> Reporter: FLORIDA LEADS THE
NATION IN "ZOMBIE" FORECLOSURES,
WHERE THE OWNER CAN'T BE FOUND,
MAY EVEN HAVE DIED.
IT LEADS IN ACTUAL FORECLOSURES:
300,000 CASES PENDING; 20,000
NEW CASES A MONTH.
ANOTHER 500,000 FLORIDA
HOMEOWNERS ARE AT LEAST THREE
MONTHS BEHIND IN THEIR PAYMENTS,
TECHNICALLY DELINQUENT.
AND HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
MODIFIED MORTGAGES AND HOME
EQUITY LOANS ARE ABOUT TO
BALLOON IN PAYMENTS.
IS MARC JOSEPH PREDICTING
ANOTHER CRASH?
HE WOULDN'T DARE.
AND NEITHER WOULD WE.
BUT, LOANS REQUIRING ONLY THREE
PERCENT DOWN ARE NOW BACK, HE
SAYS, AND...
>> IT'S A BIG SCARY THING,
BECAUSE WE ARE GETTING TO ALMOST
WHERE WE WERE IN 2005 AT
317,000.
AND IF WE GET THERE, HOW DOES
THAT SCHOOL TEACHER, HOW DOES
THAT FIREMAN, HOW DOES THAT
POLICE OFFICER, HOW DO THEY BUY
A HOUSE WHEN IT'S 317,000?
OH, WE'RE GOING TO GET CREATIVE.
WE'RE GOING TO ZERO DOWN, NO
INCOME VERIFICATION LOANS.
HERE WE GO AGAIN.
NO, WE CAN'T DO THAT.
>> Reporter: THIS IS PBS
NEWSHOUR ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT
PAUL SOLMAN, REPORTING FROM ONE
OF THE DISASTER AREAS OF THE
LAST CRASH, FORT MYERS, FLORIDA.
>> Ifill: IN CONGRESS TODAY, A
RARE AND SIGNIFICANT BIPARTISAN
AGREEMENT.
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
OVERWHELMINGLY AGREED TO REPAIR
MEDICARE.
FOR OVER A DECADE, DOCTORS HAVE
FACED REPEATED THREATS OF PAY
CUTS.
BUT THIS NEW DEAL WOULD
PERMANENTLY END THE
UNCERTAINITY.
PLUS, IT PUT HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN
BOEHNER AND DEMOCRATIC LEADER
NANCY PELOSI IN THE RARE
POSITION OF BEING ON THE SAME
SIDE.
>> THIS WILL BE THE FIRST REAL
ENTITLEMENT REFORM THAT WE'VE
SEEN IN NEARLY TWO DECADES.
AND THAT'S A BIG WIN FOR THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE.
>> I JUST HAVE CONFIDENCE THAT
THE QUALITY OF WHAT WE'VE DONE,
WHAT HAS BEEN CRAFTED IN THE
HOUSE IS REALLY A GOOD
BIPARTISAN INITIATIVE.
>> Ifill: HERE TO EXPLAIN THE
DEAL AND HOW IT WOULD WORK, IS
MARY AGNES CAREY OF KAISER
HEALTH NEWS.
THERE HAVE BEEN 17 PATCHES, FIX,
TEMPORARY FIXES FOR THIS OVER
THE YEARS.
IT'S NOT A NEW PROBLEM.
WHAT CHANGED THIS TIME?
>> A COUPLE YEARS AGO MEMBERS OF
THE HOUSE AND THE SENATE
BIPARTISAN MEMBER OF THE
RELEVANT COMMITTEES CAME
TOGETHER AND DECIDED A POLICY ON
HOW TO MOVE FORWARD THE PAY
MEDICARE PHYSICIANS.
THEY COULD NEVER FIND THE MONEY
TO FIX IT.
NOW WHAT'S HAPPENED IS THERE HAS
BEEN BIPARTISAN AGREEMENT IN THE
HOUSE TO SIMPLY SAY WE'RE NOT
GOING TO FINANCE SOME OF THIS
REPEAL OF THE MEDICARE PAYMENT
FORMULA, ABOUT $141 BILLION TO
THE DEFICIT.
THERE ARE SOME THINGS THEY ARE
FINANCING, BUT THEY DECIDED THIS
IS A HOLE THAT'S NEVER CREATEED,
IT'S NOT ONE WE HAVE TO FILL AND
WE AGREE TO JUST NOT FINANCE IT.
>> Ifill: PART OF THE FIX IS
PAYING DOCTORS FOR QUALITY OF
CARE RATHER THAN QUANTITY.
>> THE CURRENT PROGRAM
INCENTIVIZED PI -- PHYSICIANS TO
DO MORE SERVICES.
THE REPEAL TAKES A FIVE-YEAR
PATH TO PAYING PHYSICIANS ON THE
QUALITY OF CARE RATHER THAN THE
QUANTITY.
>> Ifill: NOT ONLY THAT, THERE
IS A FINANCIAL PIECE.
THE TEMPORARY FIX WAS MORE
EXPENSIVE THAN THE PERMANENT
AT $170
BILLION, FOR EXAMPLE, THE FIXES
YOU TALK ABOUT THAT HAVE
HAPPENED FOR THE LAST 12 YEARS.
THE ACTUAL REPEAL THIS TIME IS
$141 BILLION.
>> Ifill: THAT'S HOW THEY
ENDED UP ON THE SAME SIDE?
>> YES AND THERE ARE OTHER
PROVISIONS THAT ATTRACTED BOATS
IN THAT BILL, TWO YEARS OF
ADDITIONAL FUNDING FOR
CHILDREN'S HEALTH INSURANCE
PROGRAM, MORE MONEY FOR
COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS THAT
ENJOY BIPARTISAN APPEAL AND AN
EXTENSION OF MEDICARE POLICY,
INCLUDING ONE THAT PERMANENTLY
EXTENDS A PROGRAM THE HELP
LOW-INCOME BENEFICIARIES PAY FOR
THE PREMIUMS.
>> Ifill: WERE DOCTORS THE
PRIMARY FORCE IN GETTING THIS
DONE?
THEY DID NOT LIKE THE
UNCERTAINTY FROM YEAR TO YEAR.
>> THEY DIDN'T.
MOST DOCTORS DO TAKE MEDICARE
PATIENTS.
EVERY YEAR YOU SIT DOWN TRYING
TO FIGURE OUT HOW CONGRESS IS
GOING TO PAY YOU.
ARE THEY GOING TO CUT YOU?
WILL YOU GET A THREE-MONTH FIX?
SO THIS CREATED A FULL-COURT
PRESS FROM THE PHYSICIANS'
COMMUNITY AND OTHER PATIENT
COMMUNITIES AND PROVIDERS, AS
WELL TO, SAY TO CONGRESS, FIX
THIS ONCE AND FOR ALL.
>> DOES THIS HAVE ANY EFFECT ON
THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT?
>> IN THE SENSE OF MOVING
MEDICARE TO BEING A PROVIDER OF
MORE QUALITY CARE, IT CERTAINLY
DOES.
THERE ARE PROGRAMS IN THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT THAT LOOK AT
THINGS CALLED ACCOUNTABLE CARE
ORGANIZATIONS WHERE PROVIDERS
WORK TOGETHER TO IMPROVE CARE OR
BUNDLE PAYMENT OR TRY TO REDUCE
PREVENTABLE HOSPITAL
READMISSIONS TO MAKE MEDICARE A
MORE EFFICIENT PROVIDER OF
MEDICAL CARE.
>> Ifill: OF COURSE WITH
PASSAGE IN THE HOUSE, THE
PRESIDENT HAS SIGNALLED HE WILL
SIGN IT.
TODAY HE ACTUALLY PRAISED JOHN
BOEHNER AND NANCY PELOSI, WHICH
ALSO NEVER HAPPENED.
BUT THE SENATE STILL LOOMS.
SOME SENATE DEMOCRATS HAVE BEEN
UNHAPPY WITH JUST THE COMPROMISE
YOU ARE TALKING ABOUT WHICH IS
FOR THE CHILDREN'S HEALTH
PROGRAM.
THEY ARE SAYING THEY WANT IT TO
BE EXTENDED LONGER.
>> THEY WOULD LIKE FOUR YEARS OF
ADDITIONAL FUNDING AND THERE IS
ALSO SOME CONCERN ABOUT OTHER
WAYS TO FINANCE THE PACKAGE,
INCLUDING ASKING WEALTHIER
MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES TO PAY
MORE FOR THAN COVERAGE AND
STARTING IN 2020 PUTTING LIMITS
ON VERY... THEY CALL THEM THE
FIRST DOLLAR SUPPLEMENTAL MED
GAP POLICIES.
THEY'RE QUESTIONING WHY SHOULD
SENIORS PAY SO MUCH FOR MEDICARE
PHYSICIAN PAYMENT FIX.
SO YOU MIGHT HEAR SOME OF THOSE
CONCERNS ON THE SENATE FLOOR.
>> WHAT IS THE TIMING?
THIS THING IS THROUGH APRIL
5th?
IT'S SUPPOSED TO EXPIRE APRIL
1st?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
SO IN THEORY IF A FINAL FIX
ISN'T PASSED, A REPLACEMENT
FORMULA ISN'T PASSED BY APRIL
1st.
DOCTORS CAN SEE A 21% PAYMENT
CUT.
HERE'S SOMETHING THE CENTERS FOR
MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES
WHICH OVERSEES MEDICARE SERVICES
COULD DO.
THEY COULD HOLD THOSE CLAIMS FOR
TWO WEEKS.
THE HOUSE HAS ALREADY LEFT ON A
TWO-WEEK BREAK.
THE SENATE IS IN THE MIDDLE OF
FIGHTING OVER THEIR BUDGET
RESOLUTION FOR THE NEXT FISCAL
YEAR.
THEY'RE EXPECTED TO GO TOMORROW.
WHILE THEY MAY NOT TAKE ACTION
ON IT NOW, THEY COULD TAKE
ACTION ON IT WHEN THEY RETURN.
>> IT'S CLOSER TO A DEAL NOW
THAN THEY HAVE EVER BEEN.
>> CLOSER TO EVER BEFORE.
>> Ifill: MARY AGNES CAREY,
THANK YOU, AS ALWAYS.
>> SURE.
THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: THE BRUTAL MURDER
BY A MOB LAST WEEK OF A 27-YEAR-
OLD WOMAN IN AFGHANISTAN, NAMED
FARKHUNDA, HAS SPARKED WORLDWIDE
OUTRAGE AND CONCERN FOR THE
PLIGHT OF ALL AFGHAN WOMAN.
THIS WEEK A DELEGATION OF FEMALE
AFGHAN LEADERS ACCOMPANIED
PRESIDENT ASHRAF GHANI ON HIS
OFFICIAL VISIT TO WASHINGTON.
AMONG THEM, KAMILA SIDIQI, WHOSE
STORY REACHED THE UNITED STATES
IN THE 2011 BESTSELLING BOOK,
"THE DRESSMAKER OF KHAIR KHANA."
IT CHRONICLES HER BOLD EFFORTS
TO CREATE A DRESSMAKING BUSINESS
THAT SUPPORTED HER NEIGHBORHOOD
DURING YEARS OF TALIBAN RULE.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON HAPPENS TO
BE THE AUTHOR OF THAT BOOK.
SHE BRINGS US AN UPDATE NOW ON
HER REMARKABLE SUBJECT.
>> Reporter: THE LAST TIME I SAW
KAMILA SIDIQI SHE WAS A
SUCCESSFUL BUSINESSWOM INAN
KABUL WITH MORE THAN A DOZEN
EMPLOYEES.
THEN SHE STARTED A DRIED FRUIT
BUSINESS AND LAUNCHED A TAXI
COMPANY.
YET HERE SHE IS TODAY ON THE
STREETS OF WASHINGTON, D.C.
HAVING RISEN TO EVEN GREATER
HEIGHTS: SHE'S NOW DEPUTY CHIEF
OF STAFF TO THE PRESIDENT OF
AFGHANISTAN, HANDLING
TECHNOLOGY, FINANCE, ADMIN AND
HIRING IN THE OFFICE OF THE
PRESIDENT.
HER JOURNEY HAS TAKEN HER FROM A
TEENAGER TRYING TO SURVIVE
DURING THE TALIBAN YEARS TO THE
PRESIDENTIAL PALACE TODAY.
YOU ALWAYS BELIEVED THAT YOUR
HARD WORK WOULD PAY OFF, EVEN IN
THOSE TIMES WHEN THERE WERE REAL
REGULATIONS AND RULES AGAINST
WOMEN BEING OUT IN THE PUBLIC
SPHERE.
>> YES, I'M VERY GRATEFUL THE
RECOGNITION THAT I HAVE RECEIVED
FROM MY WORK TODAY, AND WORK
WITH THE OFFICE OF THE
PRESIDENT.
IT'S ONLY-- AND ALSO IF SOMEONE
WORK VERY HARD AND HAVE BELIEF
AND CONFIDENCE, I'M SURE THEY
CAN WORK IN THE OFFICE OF
PRESIDENT, AND THEY CAN WORK ANY
PLACE THEY WANTS.
>> Reporter: SIDIQI'S JOURNEY
BEGAN IN THE DAYS OF TALIBAN
RULE, WHEN WOMEN WEREN'T
PERMITTED TO WORK OR GO TO
SCHOOL OR EVEN TO LEAVE THE
HOUSE WITHOUT A MALE CHAPERONE.
DETERMINED TO SUPPORT HER FAMILY
AND WITH FEW OPTIONS LEFT GIVEN
THE TALIBAN'S RULES, SIDIQI
TURNED TO BUSINESS.
SHE LEARNED TO MAKE DRESSES.
AND FROM ONE DRESS SHE SEWED TO
HELP HER FAMILY SURVIVE, SHE
BUILT A LIVING ROOM BUSINESS
THAT PROVIDED JOBS AND AN INCOME
TO GIRLS AND WOMEN AROUND HER
NEIGHBORHOOD.
WHAT DID THOSE TIMES TEACH YOU?
>> TO BE MORE CONFIDENT THAT WE
CAN, IF WE WANT TO WORK AND HAVE
COMMITMENT, WE CAN BRING SOME
CHANGE.
>> Reporter: THAT CHANGE IS NOT
EASY IN A COUNTRY WHERE VIOLENCE
AGAINST WOMEN REMAINS RAMPANT,
CHILD MARRIAGE IS ENTRENCHED AND
FEMALE LITERACY RATES REMAIN
WELL BELOW FIFTY PEENT.RC
THE PAST DECADE HAS BROUGHT
PROGRESS; MORE THAN THREE
MILLION GIRLS IN SCHOOL AND
WOMEN AS POLICE OFFICERS,
TEACHERS AND LAWMAKERS.
ALONGSIDE THAT PROGRESS,
HOWEVER, IS THE LOOMING
UNCERTAINTY OF INSECURITY.
DO YOU EVER GET WORN DOWN BY
SECURITY SITUATION OR BY WHEN A
BIG ATTACK HAPPENS OR WHEN THE
HEADLINES ARE TOUGH OR WHEN YOU
SEE WHAT'S HAPPENING RIGHT NOW
WITH PROTESTS ON THE STREET?
DO YOU EVER QUESTION YOUR
COMMITMENT?
>> SURE, I HAVE A GOOD FEELING
FOR MY COUNTRY.
I ALWAYS CONCERN ABOUT ALL THIS
ACCIDENT AND IT HAPPEN IN MY
COUNTRY EVERY DAY.
ALL AFGHAN PEOPLE ARE CONCERNED,
AND I'M ALSO VERY CONCERNED
ABOUT THESE THINGS THAT HAPPEN,
BUT... I LOVE MY COUNTRY.
I HAVE COMMITMENT.
>> Reporter: SIDIQI REMAINS
COMMITTED TO HER COUNTRY IN PART
BECAUSE SHE NEVER REALLY LEFT.
EVEN DURING THE CIVIL WAR SHE
STAYED IN SCHOOL DESPITE ROCKETS
FALLING FROM THE SKY AND STREET-
BY-STREET TRENCH WARFARE AROUND
HER.
LIKE SO MANY OTHER AFGHANS, SHE
STAYED BEHIND TO BUILD THE BEST
LIFE SHE COULD DESPITE GROWING
UP AMID THREE DECADES OF WAR
AT A DINNER THIS WEEK FOR
PRESIDENT GHANI, SECRETARY OF
STATE JOHN KERRY PAID TRIBUTE TO
SIDIQI'S ACHIEVEMENTS.
>> I MET HER ON MY FIRST TRIP TO
KABUL WHEN I WAS SECRETARY OF
STATE, AND SHE IS A VERY BRAVE
ENTREPRENEUR WHO STARTED HER OWN
BUSINESS IN HER HOME AT A TIME
WHEN THE TALIBAN KEPT ALL WOMEN
OFF THE STREET.
AND I WOULD LIKE TO HONOR HER
ALSO IF EVERYBODY WOULD-- WHERE
IS SHE?
(APPLAUSE)
>> Reporter: SIDIQI HAD IN FACT
SKIPPED THE DINNER IN ORDER TO
ATTEND A STREET VIGIL IN
WASHINGTON FOR FARKHUNDA, THE
YOUNG AFGHAN WOMAN MURDERED BY
THE MOB IN KABUL LAST WEEK.
SIDIQI'S VISIT TO WASHINGTON HAS
BEEN A WHIRLWIND OF INTERVIEWS,
WHITE HOUSE MEETINGS, AND
CONFERENCES, INCLUDING THIS ONE
AT GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY
FEATURING AFGHAN WOMEN LEADERS.
>> TODAY WE HAVE A LOT OF
OPPORTUNITY.
IF SOMEONE WANTS TO ESTABLISH A
BUSINESS IT'S VERY EASY TO GO
AND REGISTER A COMPANY AND DO A
BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: YOUR FATHER HAD
NINE GIRLS AND TWO BOYS AND MADE
SURE THAT EVERY ONE OF THEM WAS
EDUCATED.
IS EDUCATION A PERSONAL ISSUE
FOR YOU BECAUSE OF THAT?
>> SURE.
AS YOU KNOW, THAT TODAY, I AM
WORKING IN THE OFFICE OF THE
PRESIDENT.
THAT'S ALL BECAUSE OF MY FATHER
AND MY MOTHER THAT THEY GAVE US
A CHANCE AND IN SUCH A DIFFICULT
TIMES IN AFGHANISTAN, AND THEY
ALWAYS FOCUS FOR THE EDUCATION
OF THEIR CHILDREN.
IN THIS CASE, IT'S NOT ONLY
IMPORTANT IN MY FAMILY, IT'S
IMPORTANT IN MY COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: IS THERE ANYTHING
THAT GIVES YOU CONCERN OR THINGS
THAT KEEP YOU UP AT NIGHT
WORRYING ABOUT THE FUTURE?
>> SECURITY.
SECURITY OF MY COUNTRY,
ESPECIALLY THOSE PEOPLE THAT
THEY ARE LIVING IN THE VERY
REMOTE AREA AND VERY DIFFERENT
PROVINCES, THAT THERE IS NO GOOD
LIFE FOR WOMAN.
SECURITY IS IMPORTANT FOR US,
AND I'M CONCERNED ABOUT.
>> Reporter: WELL, WE TALKED
YEARS AGO.
YOU WENT ON A BUS DOWN SOUTH TO
DO A PRESENTATION WEARING A
BURKA, AND YOU WERE TALKING TO A
MULLAH, I THINK, WHO SAID IF I
KNEW MY DAUGHTER WOULD TURN OUT
LIKE YOU...
>> YES, YOU REMEMBER THAT.
IT WAS IN KANDAHAR WHEN I
PROVIDED A TRAINING AND IN
KANDAHAR IT WAS A GENDER
TRAINING AND BUSINESS, AND THAT
WAS HIS COMMENT ABOUT ME, AND HE
SAID, HE PROMISED ME THAT I WILL
GIVE MY SUPPORT FOR MY GIRL TO
BE LIKE YOU IN THE FUTURE.
>> Reporter: DO YOU THINK ABOUT
YOURSELF AS A ROLE MODEL?
>> I HOPE.
LET PEOPLE JUDGE.
>> Reporter: FOR THE NEWSHOUR,
I'M GAYLE TZEMACH LEMMON IN
WASHINGTON.
>> Ifill: FINALLY, MARCH MADNESS
CONTINUES THIS EVENING WITH THE
NEXT ROUND OF THE NCAA PLAYOFFS,
KNOWN AS THE SWEET SIXTEEN.
WITH SO MANY EYES FOLLOWING THE
EXCITEMENT ON THE COURT, WE TURN
TO STORY OF HOW ONE WRITER USED
BASKETBALL, TO INSPIRE CHILDREN
TO READ.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS MORE, OUR
LATEST CONVERSATION FROM "THE
NEWSHOUR BOOKSHELF."
>> Brown: UP AND DOWN THE
COURT, A DRIVE TO THE HOOP, A
FAST BREAK IN THE OTHER
DIRECTION.
MIDDLE SCHOOL BOYS AND
BASKETBALL, AND, WELL, WHY NOT
POETRY?
THEY COME TOGETHER IN "THE
CROSSOVER," A NOVEL IN VERSE
ABOUT TWIN BROTHERS OBSESSED
WITH BASKETBALL.
IT'S WON THIS YEAR'S NEWBERY
MEDAL.
>> JOSH BELL IS MY NAME, BUT
MR. McNASTY IS MY CLAIM TO
FAME, FOLKS CALL ME THAT BECAUSE
MY GAME IS SO DOWNRIGHT DIRTY IT
WILL PUT YOU TO SHAME.
>> Brown: ITS AUTHOR IS
46-YEAR-OLD POET, WRITER AND
LITERARY ACTIVIST KWAME
ALEXANDER.
AT THE ST. STEPHENS AND ST.
AGNES SCHOOL NEAR HIS HOME IN
NORTHERN VIRGINIA, HE TOLD US OF
HIS OWN OBSESSION, INTRODUCING
BOYS TO THE JOYS OF READING.
>> WE WANT TO REACH ALL KIDS,
LIBRARIANS AND TEACHERS.
BUT WE OFTEN HEAR THAT BOYS ARE
RELUCTANT READERS.
I DON'T BELIEVE THEY HAVE
ANYTHING THAT'S RELATABLE.
BASKETBALL GETS THEM HOOKED.
ONCE YOU GET THEMFAMILY, LOVE, ,
BROTHERHOOD, YOU KNOW, JEALOUSY,
ALL THE THINGS THAT GIRLS ARE
INTERESTED IN, ALL THE THINGS
THAT WE'RE INTERESTED IN.
WE'RE ALL INTERESTED IN THE SAME
THINGS, BUT I THINK SOMETIMES
WITH BOYS YOU HAVE TO REACH THEM
A DIFFERENT WAY.
>> Brown: A NOVEL IN VERSE.
YOU ARE TRYING TO REACH BOYS
ESPECIALLY, PARTICULARLY, AND
YOU'RE GIVING THEM POETRY.
>> YEAH.
RIGHT.
NO, YOU'RE DEAD ON.
THAT'S WHY THE BOOK GOT REJECTED
20-PLUS TIMES.
>> Brown: REALLY?
>> YOU HAVE ISTH SPORTS BOOK AND
YOU'RE WRITING IN POETRY?
THERE'S A DISCONNECT.
SO HOW DO WE HOOK KIDS WHO ARE
RELUCTANT READ CENTERS POETRY IS
A VEHICLE.
I BELIEVE IT CAN BE THE BRIDGE,
JEFFREY, TO TAKE OUR KIDS TO A
MORE HIGHER LEVEL OF
APPRECIATION FOR LANGUAGE AND
LITERATURE.
>> Brown: "THE CROSSOVER"
TELLS IN THE YEAR OF A LIFE OF A
CLOSE-KNIT AFRICAN AMERICAN
FAMILIES, THE TRAUMAS OF
ADOLESCENCE AND SIBLING RIVALRY,
THE ILLNESS OF A LOVING FATHER.
IT ALSO SH THE SOMETIMES
SUBTLE WAYS THAT RACE PLAYS A
ROLE IN THE BOYS' LIVES.
THE MOTHER TELLS HER SON ABOUT
BEING CAREFUL ABOUT HOW YOUNG
BLACK MEN SHOULD NOT SHOW THEIR
ACTOR IN PUBLIC.
ARE YOU CONSCIOUS OF THE MESSAGE
IN A SENSE OR JUST SHOWING US,
HOW DO WE LOOK?
>> THAT'S INTERESTING BECAUSE
WHEN I WROTE IT, I OFTEN HEAR
THAT QUESTION.
THERE'S A STRONG RACE ELEMENT AS
IT RELATES TO THE WAY THEY'RE
TRYING TO RAISE THEIR BOYS OR
WHEN THE FATHER GETS STOPPED BY
THE POLICE.
I NEVER THOUGHT ABOUT THAT WHEN
I WAS WRITING IT.
IT DIDN'T COME TO MIND THAT THE
MOTHER WAS TALKING TO HER YOUNG
BLACK BOY AND SAYING, YOU KNOW,
YOU'RE GOING TO... IF YOU'RE
ANGRY, YOU'RE GOING TO END UP
LIKE THIS.
IT WAS JUST, YOU KNOW, A MOTHER
TRYING TO TELL HER CHILD THAT
YOU NEED TO HAVE A LITTLE BIT OF
JOY IN THIS WORLD.
YOU NEED TO FIND A LITTLE BIT OF
PEACE.
IF THAT STORY CAN RELATE THE A
YOUNG BLACK BOY AS IT SHOULD,
THEN GREAT.
IF IT CAN RELATE TO A YOUNG
IANAS BOY, THEN GREAT.
BUT I THINK THE IDEA IS WE WANT
OUR CHILDREN TO BE INTERESTED IN
POSITIVITY AND NOT NECESSARILY
NEGATIVITY.
VINGHA GREAT PHYSICAL BEAUTY AND
APPEAL AS IN EVERY GUY IN THE
LUNCHROOM IS TRYING TO FLIRT
WITH THE NEW GIRL BECAUSE SHE'S
SO PUNKATOODLISH.
AS IN NEVER HAD A GIRLFRIEND,
BUT IF I DID, WHY IS THE
PUNKATOODLISH NEW GIRL TALKING
TO MY BROTHER.
>> Brown: YOU'RE A POET.
THERE'S RHYME, STUFF THAT SOUNDS
LIKE RAP, FREE VERSE.
>> THERE'S HUE CUE, THERE ARE
LIST POEMS AND VOCABULARY POEMS.
I'M IN LOVE WITH POETRY.
THERE ARE SO MANY DIFFERENT
FORMS OF POETRY.
I BELIEVE I WANTED TO HAVE THAT
VARIETY, THAT SORT OF DIVERSITY
OF VERSE SO THAT KIDS CAN SORT
OF FIGURE OUT WHAT THEY ARE
INTERESTED IN AND WHAT THEY CAN
LATCH ON TO AND PERHAPS MIMIC
SOME OF THESE POEMS THEMSELVES.
>> Brown: THAT MESSAGE ISN'T
LOST ON TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY WHO HAVE SEEN
CHILDREN DRAWN TO THE CROSSOVER
SUCH AS THIS SEVENTH GRADER IN
WELLESLEY, MASSACHUSETTS.
BREAKING, BREAKING.
TAKE HIM TO THE LEFT
>> THIS IS THE NEXT THING I DO
WHEN I'M WRITING A POEM.
>> Brown: KWAME ALEXANDER
HIMSELF GETS INTO CLASSROOMS
FREQUENTLY, WORKING WITH
STUDENTS THROUGH HIS "BOOK IN A
DAY" PROGRAM.
HE'S ALSO TAKEN THOSE EFFORTS
OVERSEAS, READING A -- LEADING A
DELEGATION TO GHANA IN 2013 TO
DISTRIBUTE BOOKS, BILDU A
LIBRARY AND TRAIN TEACHERS.
>> I DON'T BELIEVE THAT WRITING
IS JUST PEN TO PAPER OR FINGER
TO LAPTOP.
WRITING IS ACTIVE.
WRITING IS ACTION.
WRITING IS ACTIVISM.
WRITING IS BEING PART OF THE
WORLD.
THAT'S WHAT I LIKE TO DO.
I LIKE TO INSPIRE AND SHOW
TEACHERS THAT POETRY ON ONE
LEVEL IS COOL.
AND I LIKE... I THINK I'VE
LEARNED HOW TO DO THAT TO A
CERTAIN DEGREE.
>> WOW.
>> YOU SAY IT'S COOL.
WHAT DO YOU DO?
>> WHAT AM I DOING?
I GOT UP THIS MORNING FEELING
GOOD AND BLACK, BLACK
THOUGHTS.
I DID BLACK THINGS LIKE PLAYED
ALL MY BLACK RECORDS AND MINDED
MY OWN BLACK BUSINESS.
I UT OPN MY BEST BLACK CLOTHES,
WALKED OUT MY BACK DOOR AND LORD
HAVER IN SI, WHITE SNOW.
I SHOW THEM.
I DON'T NEED TO TELL YOU THAT
IT'S FUNNY, THAT IT'S COOL.
THAT WAS A POEM BY JACKIE EARLY
CALLED 1,968 WINTERS.
SO I MODEL WHAT POETRY CAN DO.
THREE LINES OF THE HAIKU.
THE LAST LINE ALWAYS HAS TO BE
THE AH-HAH.
>> Brown: KWAME ALEXANDER,
CONGRATULATIONS AND THANK YOU
FOR TALKING TO US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
INVESTIGATORS IN FRANCE
CONCLUDED THE 27-YEAR-OLD CO-
PILOT OF A GERMANWINGS FLIGHT
DELIBERATELY SLAMMED THE PLANE
WITH 150 PEOPLE ONBOARD INTO THE
ALPS.
AND, YEMEN FELL FURTHER INTO
CHAOS AS SAUDI ARABIA AND ITS
ARAB ALLIES HIT HOUTHI REBEL
TARGETS.
THE YEMENI PRESIDENT LEFT HIS
REFUGE THERE, TO GO TO SAUDI
ARABIA.
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, CHINA IS RACING TO SAVE
THE LAST MAMMALS OF THE YANGTZE
RIVER BY TRANSPORTING
EIGHT OF THEM TO A NEW HOME, FAR
AWAY FROM HUMANS.
INDUSTRIAL AND AGRICULTURAL
POLLUTION HAVE DIMINISHHED THE
YANGTZE FINLESS PORPOISE, AND
NOW THERE ARE ONLY 1,000 OF THEM
LEFT.
YOU CAN READ ABOUT THE PLIGHT OF
THESE FRESH WATER MAMMALS, AND
SEE A PHOTO GALLERY ON OUR HOME
PAGE.
THAT'S AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT ONE OF
THE MOST ACCLAIMED WORKS OF
MODERN DANCE BY FAMED
CHOREOGRAPHER MARK MORRIS.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.